(34) When end-users who are natural persons have provided their consent to receiving direct marketing
communications , they should still be able to withdraw their consent at any time in an easy manner and
without any cost to them.
To facilitate effective enforcement of Union rules on direct marketing communications, it is necessary to
prohibit the masking of the identity and the use of false identities, false return addresses or numbers while
sending direct marketing communications .
Direct marketing communications should therefore be clearly recognizable as such and should indicate the
identity of the legal or the natural person sending the communication and, where applicable, on whose behalf
the communication is sent and provide the necessary information for end-users who are natural persons to
exercise their right to withdraw their consent to receiving further direct marketing communications, such as
valid contact details (e.g.link, e-mail address) which can be easily used by end-users who are natural
persons to withdraw their consent free of charge.

(35) In order to allow easy withdrawal of consent, legal or natural persons conducting direct marketing
communications by email should present a link, or a valid electronic mail address, which can be easily used
by end-users to withdraw their consent.

Legal or natural persons conducting direct marketing communications through voice-tovoice calls and through
calls by automating calling and communication systems should display their identity line on which the company
can be called or present a specific code identifying the fact that the call is a marketing call.

(36) Voice-to-voice direct marketing calls that do not involve the use of automated calling and communication
systems, given that they are more costly for the sender and impose no financial costs on end-users.

Member States should therefore be able to establish and or maintain national systems only allowing such calls
to end-users who have not objected.

(37) Service providers who offer electronic communications services should inform endusers of measures they
can take to protect the security of their communications for instance by using specific types of software or
encryption technologies.

The requirement to inform end-users of particular security risks does not discharge a service provider from
the obligation to take, at its own costs, appropriate and immediate measures to remedy any new, unforeseen
security risks and restore the normal security level of the service.

The provision of information about security risks to the subscriber should be free of charge.

Security is appraised in the light of Article 32 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

(38) To ensure full consistency with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the enforcement of the provisions of this
Regulation should be entrusted to the same authorities responsible for the enforcement of the provisions
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and this Regulation relies on the consistency mechanism of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

Member States should be able to have more than one supervisory authority, to reflect their constitutional,
organisational and administrative structure.

The supervisory authorities should also be responsible for monitoring the application of this Regulation
regarding electronic communications data for legal entities.

Such additional tasks should not jeopardise the ability of the supervisory authority to perform its tasks
regarding the protection of personal data under Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and this Regulation.

Each supervisory authority should be provided with the additional financial and human resources, premises and
infrastructure necessary for the effective performance of the tasks under this Regulation.

(39) Each supervisory authority should be competent on the territory of its own Member State to exercise the
powers and to perform the tasks set forth in this Regulation.

In order to ensure consistent monitoring and enforcement of this Regulation throughout the Union, the
supervisory authorities should have the same tasks and effective powers in each Member State, without
prejudice to the powers of prosecutorial authorities under Member State law, to bring infringements of this
Regulation to the attention of the judicial authorities and engage in legal proceedings.

Member States and their supervisory authorities are encouraged to take account of the specific needs of
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises in the application of this Regulation.

(40) In order to strengthen the enforcement of the rules of this Regulation, each supervisory authority
should have the power to impose penalties including administrative fines for any infringement of this
Regulation, in addition to, or instead of any other appropriate measures pursuant to this Regulation.

This Regulation should indicate infringements and the upper limit and criteria for setting the related
administrative fines, which should be determined by the competent supervisory authority in each individual
case, taking into account all relevant circumstances of the specific situation, with due regard in particular
to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement and of its consequences and the measures taken to
ensure compliance with the obligations under this Regulation and to prevent or mitigate the consequences of
the infringement.

For the purpose of setting a fine under this Regulation, an undertaking should be understood to be an
undertaking in accordance with Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty.

(41) In order to fulfil the objectives of this Regulation, namely to protect the fundamental rights and
freedoms of natural persons and in particular their right to the protection of personal data and to ensure
the free movement of personal data within the Union, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290
of the Treaty should be delegated to the Commission to supplement this Regulation.

In particular, delegated acts should be adopted in respect of the information to be presented, including by
means of standardised icons in order to give an easily visible and intelligible overview of the collection of
information emitted by terminal equipment, its purpose, the person responsible for it and of any measure the
end-user of the terminal equipment can take to minimise the collection.

Delegated acts are also necessary to specify a code to identify direct marketing calls including those made
through automated calling and communication systems.

It is of particular importance that the Commission carries out appropriate consultations and that those
consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement on
Better Law-Making of 13 April 20168.

In particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament
and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States' experts, and their experts
systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated
acts.

Furthermore, in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing
powers should be conferred on the Commission when provided for by this Regulation.

Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.

(42) Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to ensure an equivalent level of protection of natural
and legal persons and the free flow of electronic communications data throughout the Union, cannot be
sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can rather, by reason of the scale or effects of the action,
be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of
subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union.

In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go
beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.

(43) Directive 2002/58/EC should be repealed.

HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: 8 Interinstitutional Agreement between the European Parliament, the Council of
the European Union and the European Commission on Better Law-Making of 13 April 2016 (OJ L 123, 12.5.2016,
p.1â€“14).

CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1 Subject matter 1.

This Regulation lays down rules regarding the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of natural and
legal persons in the provision and use of electronic communications services, and in particular, the rights
to respect for private life and communications and the protection of natural persons with regard to the
processing of personal data.

2.This Regulation ensures free movement of electronic communications data and electronic communications
services within the Union, which shall be neither restricted nor prohibited for reasons related to the
respect for the private life and communications of natural and legal persons and the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data.

3.The provisions of this Regulation particularise and complement Regulation (EU) 2016/679 by laying down
specific rules for the purposes mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2.

Article 2 Material Scope 1.

This Regulation applies to the processing of electronic communications data carried out in connection with
the provision and the use of electronic communications services and to information related to the terminal
equipment of end-users.

2.This Regulation does not apply to: (a) activities which fall outside the scope of Union law; (b) activities
of the Member States which fall within the scope of Chapter 2 of Title V of the Treaty on European Union; (c)
electronic communications services which are not publicly available; (d) activities of competent authorities
for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the
execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public
security; 3.

The processing of electronic communications data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies is
governed by Regulation (EU) 00/0000 [new Regulation replacing Regulation 45/2001].

4.This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the application of Directive 2000/31/EC9, in particular of
the liability rules of intermediary service providers in Articles 12 to 15 of that Directive.

5.This Regulation shall be without prejudice to the provisions of Directive 2014/53/EU.

9 Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects
of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market ('Directive on
electronic commerce') (OJ L 178, 17.7.

2000, p.1â€“16).

Article 3 Territorial scope and representative 1.

This Regulation applies to: (a) the provision of electronic communications services to end-users in the
Union, irrespective of whether a payment of the end-user is required; (b) the use of such services; (c) the
protection of information related to the terminal equipment of end-users located in the Union.

2.Where the provider of an electronic communications service is not established in the Union it shall
designate in writing a representative in the Union.

3.The representative shall be established in one of the Member States where the endusers of such electronic
communications services are located.

4.The representative shall have the power to answer questions and provide information in addition to or
instead of the provider it represents, in particular, to supervisory authorities, and end-users, on all
issues related to processing electronic communications data for the purposes of ensuring compliance with this
Regulation.

5.The designation of a representative pursuant to paragraph 2 shall be without prejudice to legal actions,
which could be initiated against a natural or legal person who processes electronic communications data in
connection with the provision of electronic communications services from outside the Union to end-users in
the Union.

Article 4 Definitions 1.

For the purposes of this Regulation, following definitions shall apply: (a) the definitions in Regulation (
EU) 2016/679; (b) the definitions of â€˜electronic communications networkâ€™, â€˜electronic communications
serviceâ€™, â€˜interpersonal communications serviceâ€™, â€˜number-based interpersonal communications serviceâ€™,
â€˜number-independent interpersonal communications serviceâ€™, â€˜end-userâ€™ and â€˜callâ€™ in points (1), (4), (5), (
6), (7), (14) and (21) respectively of Article 2 of [Directive establishing the European Electronic
Communications Code]; (c) the definition of 'terminal equipment' in point (1) of Article 1 of Commission
Directive 2008/63/EC10.

2.For the purposes of point (b) of paragraph 1, the definition of â€˜interpersonal communications serviceâ€™
shall include services which enable interpersonal and interactive communication merely as a minor ancillary
feature that is intrinsically linked to another service.

3.In addition, for the purposes of this Regulation the following definitions shall apply: (a) â€˜electronic
communications dataâ€™ means electronic communications content and electronic communications metadata; 10
Commission Directive 2008/63/EC of 20 June 2008 on competition in the markets in telecommunications terminal
equipment (OJ L 162, 21.

6.2008, p.

20â€“26). (b) â€˜electronic communications contentâ€™ means the content exchanged by means of electronic
communications services, such as text, voice, videos, images, and sound; (c) â€˜electronic communications
metadataâ€™ means data processed in an electronic communications network for the purposes of transmitting,
distributing or exchanging electronic communications content; including data used to trace and identify the
source and destination of a communication, data on the location of the device generated in the context of
providing electronic communications services, and the date, time, duration and the type of communication; (d)
â€˜publicly available directoryâ€™ means a directory of end-users of electronic communications services, whether
in printed or electronic form, which is published or made available to the public or to a section of the
public, including by means of a directory enquiry service; (e) â€˜electronic mailâ€™ means any electronic message
containing information such as text, voice, video, sound or image sent over an electronic communications
network which can be stored in the network or in related computing facilities, or in the terminal equipment
of its recipient; (f) â€˜direct marketing communicationsâ€™ means any form of advertising, whether written or
oral, sent to one or more identified or identifiable end-users of electronic communications services,
including the use of automated calling and communication systems with or without human interaction,
electronic mail, SMS, etc.

; (g) â€˜direct marketing voice-to-voice callsâ€™ means live calls, which do not entail the use of automated
calling systems and communication systems; (h) â€˜automated calling and communication systemsâ€™ means systems
capable of automatically initiating calls to one or more recipients in accordance with instructions set for
that system, and transmitting sounds which are not live speech, including calls made using automated calling
and communication systems which connect the called person to an individual.

CHAPTER II PROTECTION OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS OF NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS AND OF INFORMATION STORED IN
THEIR TERMINAL EQUIPMENT Article 5 Confidentiality of electronic communications data Electronic
communications data shall be confidential.

Any interference with electronic communications data, such as by listening, tapping, storing, monitoring,
scanning or other kinds of interception, surveillance or processing of electronic communications data, by
persons other than the end-users, shall be prohibited, except when permitted by this Regulation.

Article 6 Permitted processing of electronic communications data 1.

Providers of electronic communications networks and services may process electronic communications data if: (
a) it is necessary to achieve the transmission of the communication, for the duration necessary for that
purpose; or (b) it is necessary to maintain or restore the security of electronic communications networks and
services, or detect technical faults and/or errors in the transmission of electronic communications, for the
duration necessary for that purpose.

2.Providers of electronic communications communications metadata if: (a) it is necessary to meet mandatory
quality of service requirements pursuant to [Directive establishing the European Electronic Communications
Code] or Regulation (EU) 2015/212011 for the duration necessary for that purpose; or (b) it is necessary for
billing, calculating interconnection payments, detecting or stopping fraudulent, or abusive use of, or
subscription to, electronic communications services; or (c) the end-user concerned has given his or her
consent to the processing of his or her communications metadata for one or more specified purposes, including
for the provision of specific services to such end-users, provided that the purpose or purposes concerned
could not be fulfilled by processing information that is made anonymous.

3.Providers of the electronic communications services may process electronic communications content only: (a)
for the sole purpose of the provision of a specific service to an end-user, if the enduser or end-users
concerned have given their consent to the processing of his or her electronic communications content and the
provision of that service cannot be fulfilled without the processing of such content; or (b) if all end-users
concerned have given their consent to the processing of their electronic communications content for one or
more specified purposes that cannot be fulfilled by processing information that is made anonymous, and the
provider has consulted the supervisory authority.

Points (2) and (3) of Article 36 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 shall apply to the consultation of the
supervisory authority.

services may process electronic


